welcome to another episode of falsehood
the fitness we're going to talk about
training range of motion today so give
it a couple minutes for everybody to
show up everybody see my new x3 cup
this isn't beyond it's gonna pair of
superheroes notice the the gentleman has
no hair that's my idea
so okay wait for a little good we got
quite a few on Instagram this area must
be just easier to jump in and out of for
most people so I'll just give a brief on
what we're gonna be talking about and
then we'll sort of officially start it
Gregory hey are you doing so what we're
what we keep running into and comments
and questions is range of motion isn't
it true that if you train one range of
motion that you only get stronger in
that one position and not in other
positions so there's a couple different
ways to answer that I mean clearly
that's a violation of like principles of
human physiology because you don't use
all brains of motion even we left or we
do anything but that's that's what we're
going to talk about and then I'll talk
about some research and then practical
applications so we're going to be
talking about has been well-documented
in a one particular powerful study which
is authored by a guy worked with when I
was Hewson is officer power play a guy
named swap on Mukerjee he's a department
head University of Ohio
kinesiology department head by the name
of the university's just escaping me at
the moment but uh like smartest guy when
it comes to exercise
just just the best guy hanging out with
so I'll be reviewing that and then
talking about the strength curve price
see over the top of my hat I got a
couple graphic so I realized I wouldn't
show up on the cameras so Chelsea was
nice enough so I could do it on paper so
you guys could see much better in the
camera all right Robert does good hey
Robert hey Melanie all right so let's
jump into it now when you train a
specific range of motion is the
adaptation only in that range of motion
okay just just from like biology you
know high school you know that the
length of a cell of a muscle cell runs
the entire length of the muscle and so a
cell is activated it's activated it's
just amount of a matter of how short
that cell gets there's there's acting
and - and the two types of filaments
inside of these cells and they come
together or they don't and the amount of
those microfilaments that come together
is the shortening of the muscle so you
know I can track my bicep like it's
short it's long here so like like if
they're shortening but it's not like I'm
not engaging the muscle when it's in its
length in position or or whatever so
what what we need to look at is the fact
that functionally I always reference the
term functional fitness is one of the
most overused misused terms but we
choose to use ranges of motion when we
have to get like a task done as opposed
to saying I'm going to lift a static
weight through a given range of motion
so for example a sprinter uses seven
degrees of flexion behind their knee so
you have 180 degrees of range of motion
and your knee joint but when you need to
run fast you all
you seven why it's because that's the
range of motion that is efficient the
muscle the quadricep it is at its
shortest therefore you have access to
the most muscular tissue so you can you
can engage the cell to a higher degree
so it's not really you're engaging one
little part of the muscle and it's
different parts of the muscle when the
muscles shorter it's the same muscle
that's engaging it's just the degree of
engagement that happens in that stronger
range of motion so so you see sprinters
and the idea that a sprinter is only
getting stronger and that seven degrees
of motion if that were true then a
sprinter wouldn't be able to get out of
a chair very well because when their
knee is at 90 degrees when you're
sitting in the chair and you get up out
of the chair you have no strength right
oh but they're incredibly strong at all
ranges of motion so it completely
translates as long as the stronger range
is fatigue which is why sprinters have
such powerful leg strength and I don't I
can't say this about all sprinters but
typically sprinters don't squat because
they don't fire those muscles in a
different pattern they want a trainee
now they do drills they do behind ease
and stuff but that has to do with
flexibility that doesn't have to do with
like firing the muscle that's another
thing we get well they you know they do
it with high knees like that's not a
strength event that's a range of motion
stretching type activities so based on
but first to dispel that myth completely
there's a 1999 study by swat Mukerji the
guy
mentioned earlier and then one of his
students Nick Travis and mu contain
grommets and the g99 did a fixed
benchpress joint angles so they're bench
pressing just in a very short range of
motion and what they did is they had
people cleaning in just this short range
of motion very short repetitions and
they tried to get it to the where they'd
good failure in just this range of
motion and then they would go back to
full range training to do a post-test
after a certain period of time I don't
remember how many weeks it was of this
strong regional training what they
determined was that these individuals
kind of card was strong even ranges of
motion they never used doesn't that make
sense because they were fatiguing the
entire muscle now that's not the whole
story because what they're really
getting is a myofibril effects of
density of cell as opposed to volume of
cells so that that would be like a more
strength versus mass kind of effect even
though it's never quite as one or the
other there's a lot of one at little of
the other sometimes and the same vice
versa so what's important to point out
is that we have a strength curve so I
want to see the top
imaging and this is what we see strength
curves when look at the top image first
so when we're gonna rearrange motion we
are cable a small amount of weight 1/7
is what we are in the stronger range of
motion right so but it's not linear
there's a steep curve like we're real
powerful out here and down here
way less powerful and then down here way
less than even that so it's not like we
want to necessarily look at it in a
linear fashion it's just
not and the bone-density research really
really really proves this out here so
how do we get really heavy loads in this
range of motion and then lighter loads
and the reason we want a variance in the
loads is to trigger both types of
muscular growth so phase one of the
teague when you do an X recession has to
do that full range like I'm firing the
whole muscle whole tricep the whole
pectoral the whole deltoid and I'm going
to fatigue where everything is most
powerful where I'm capable of delivering
the most amount of force so that shows a
structural deficit to the central
nervous system hence the structural
adaptation more myofibril growth very
aggressive protein synthesis which means
the muscle becomes more dense and that's
a very high power way power to weight
ratio muscle then as you go to phase 2
type of fatigue when you're doing that
when you can't get to the stronger
engine work and you're doing the shorter
range like I'm just going from here to
here so let's say I've got a hundred
pounds here and 300 pounds here so I'm
doing very short repetition let's call
half but you know it's anywhere in there
and then in the sort of middle space so
now what am i fatiguing it's not the
structure of the muscle because where
did that which is why we can't get a
full extension anymore now we're running
out of ATP glycogen and creatine
phosphate we're running out of the fuels
and fueled fatigue is a different type
of muscular fatigue now when your
central nervous system sees that you
evacuate the fuels in the cell very
quickly it says oh it's an irritant all
exercises and irritants I really like
using that word because it it accurately
tells the story of the fact that there's
a there's a point to where certain
tissues in the body are really shutting
down so that process the fuel load and
storage within the cell becomes
irritated because you're out of it and
then you begin to go to fatigue and
motion even holding a lighter weight
which is very easy on the joints but
it's a deeper level of fatigue so you're
getting both the absolute maximum
myofibril stimulus in that phase one and
then that phase two is the diminishing
range that you're getting and I did an
infographic in fact somebody probably
post in the comments who's an
infographic showing the diminishing
range of why why would we do that
and it's super powerful and that's also
why we do one set with slightly higher
repetitions that brings me to the second
part of this that's graphic right here
which has to do with the strength curve
this is the same curve and we didn't
draw it all the way up to 7x so just the
5x because the reason is that the latex
that people use with x3 is let's say
five accent extension is because you
really want to make sure that you're not
denying this curve and this is also why
we do high repetitions with x3 because
you are so powerful in the stronger
range of motion and just from bone
density perspective those momentary just
engagements that are just isolated like
for example when I push with my upper
extremities to stimulate bone growth and
I'll see a strong I can put 4000 pounds
through my legs well I'm not gonna put
4000 pounds for my legs with x3 or any
other type of method like that's why all
skiers from is so powerful for bone but
from a muscular standpoint I want to
fatigue that stronger range of motion
with multiple repetitions and I don't
want to get stuck not being able to
manage my way through these these mid
points which are quite a bit weaker than
the strong so first you go to fatigue in
the strong because this is linear the
latex is linear but you're not so you
video higher repetitions and you end up
working your way down that that curve
with those large repetitions because you
make sure you get to that fatigue there
and you're still using a weight that's
in your capability range throughout this
whole curve so like when somebody says
yeah I got the elite band and I can my
workouts only like five reps now it's
like now don't do it like that you're
not going to get great results you'll
get some myofibril probably but you
won't you won't get the size that you're
looking for you just get the power so
let's really focus on getting both you
want you want to have love so that's
that's really the focus of today's
falsehoods of fitness and so don't let
anybody tell you you know the range of
motion is lateral
one of my favorite examples is somebody
says well you know if you don't go full
range you don't touch a bar on your
chest and the benchpress because they're
like competing in the sport of the
benchpress and I go yeah that's great
what about guys who bench with dumbbells
because they can go down even further
because they don't have a bar in the way
are they doing a real benchpress like
what does a real need so for those who
aren't so involved in the sport of a
movement no there's nothing wrong that
in fact there's a lot of extra users
that are using x3 as their sort of
finishing set when they do the regular
workout so they are still practicing the
sport of their movement because keep in
mind whether it's bench presses or
CrossFit movements these are skills as
well as power outputs so they got to
keep that skill alive and keep in that
in that movement pattern they have to
fire those muscles in that right order
so like a baseball pitcher doesn't
decide I'll just go off the bench press
in the offseason I'm not going to throw
a ball no don't do that because you
screw that up
so same same kind of thing but you don't
want to get your training stimulus
confused with what your sport is so you
can have a particular thing that you do
but you can also train
a certain way to optimize that thing you
do and get more loans out of it so I
think that concludes times a little
short we've got a bunch of things we got
to get done today